<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>X</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-2" id="chapter-2-10" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</h3>
			<p>It was late when Martin came home, and he was dead tired but could not sleep. Black butterflies fluttered before his eyes, and thoughts and rhythms came to him as he lay and stared into the dark. He raised himself in bed and relighted the candle on his bedside table, where paper and pen were at hand as always. He felt no feverish overexcitement, only a deep weariness, which pained him but did not delude. He saw clearly where his thought wavered and needed the support of a rhythm, a bit of melody; he changed and erased, and finally a poem evolved.</p>
			<div class="poetry-container">
				<div class="poetry">
					<div class="stanza">
						<div class="indent0 verse">You up yonder</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">Who are deaf and dumb!</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">You up yonder,</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">Who with your right hand squeeze</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">The fresh and sweetly-smelling fruit of Good</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">And with your left constrict</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">The poison-dripping maggot nest of Ill,</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">Looking upon them</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">With equal satisfaction!</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">You up yonder,</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">Whose glance is dim</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">With all the emptiness of space⁠—</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">I have a prayer to you.</div>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<div class="indent0 verse">One prayer, but one,</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">Which you can never hear</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">And cannot fulfill:</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">Teach me,</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">Teach me to forget</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">I ever met your glance.</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">For look!</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">In youthful days</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">I myself made a god</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">In mine own image,</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">A warm and living and aggressive god,</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">And on a spring day I went out</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">To seek for him through all the world and heavens.</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">Not him I found,</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">But you.</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">Not life’s divinity</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">But death’s I found under the mask of life.</div>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<div class="indent0 verse">Take the memory of the sight of you</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">Away, O horrible One! That memory is</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">A hidden sickness, is a worm that gnaws</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">My life-tree’s root.</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">I know it well, with every barren year</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">And every day that runs in vain</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">It gnaws yet closer to my being’s nerve.</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">It gnaws and preys upon</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">All that in me which is of human worth,</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">All that which dares, all that which wills and works;</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">Nor does it spare</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">The wondrous, brittle time-piece of the soul</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">Which points out Good and Ill.</div>
					</div>
					<div class="stanza">
						<div class="indent0 verse">Speak, you up yonder,</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">Is it your will</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">To re-create me after your own image?</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">Was that the meaning hidden in your word:</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">“He who hath seen God, he must die the death”?</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">O horrible One,</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">Have you the heart to infect</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">Me, a poor child of men,</div>
						<div class="indent0 verse">With your immortal vices?</div>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
