<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-2" id="chapter-2-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</h3>
			<p>Henrik Rissler had come down from Upsala. He had just taken his preliminary degree and in a couple of weeks was to make a tour down in Europe while he wrote his thesis, “On Romantic Irony.” He had no independent means, but his uncle⁠—a bank lawyer, politician, and millionaire⁠—had offered to pay for the trip. This Martin already knew from Henrik’s letters. But before he started he was to rest a few weeks. He was somewhat overworked, for he had studied hard so as to get away from Upsala as soon as possible, and he had also taken extra time to write some critical studies for a magazine and so become a little better known among the score or so of men who interested themselves in such things.</p>
			<p>Martin had been expecting him for a couple of days and had a bottle of wine and a pack of cigarettes ready.</p>
			<p>Henrik shaded his eyes from the sun and said: “Here everything is the same. Here time has stood still.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, in this immediate region,” answered Martin. “Only they have built a big factory chimney over opposite. It has been quite a diversion for me in solitude. For a while I worked in competition with the masons, but I was beaten. I began on a poem when they had just begun on the chimney; now the chimney is done, but not the poem. It’s beautiful, what’s more⁠—the chimney, I mean. Especially in the evening as a silhouette. The smoke no longer belches out, one forgets its purpose; it is no longer a chimney, it is a pillar tower built by some Chaldæan prince and priest, who mounts it when night comes on and measures the course of the stars.”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Henrik, “one forgets the purpose, then first it becomes beautiful.”</p>
			<p>“No,” replied Martin, “it doesn’t become beautiful because one forgets its purpose, but because one invents for it another which has the prestige of old and venerable poetic tradition. But outside of that, in and for themselves, without any fancification, factory chimneys are among the most beautiful of modern structures. They promise less than they make good, and at least they are no masquerade figures either in Gothic or Renaissance.”</p>
			<p>Henrik smiled. “You’re talking in the style of the ‘ ’Eighties,’ ” he said.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Henrik Rissler sat in his old place in the sofa corner, Martin sat in the rocking-chair at the writing table. They were drinking wine and talking about Upsala, about books and women, and about a new philosopher by the name of Nietzsche. And as they talked, the sunbeam in which the motes danced like red sparks grew ever narrower and more oblique and more decidedly red.</p>
			<p>Martin surveyed Henrik. He found him changed; his face was leaner, stronger, and more masculine in contour. Why had he said, “Here everything is the same, here time has stood still”? He had had an experience, but what? He was in love presumably; he would perhaps go so far as to get engaged⁠—to whom? Was it his cousin Anna Rissler? She was fond of him and he knew it. No, that couldn’t be. Was it Maria Randel, or Sigrid Tesch?</p>
			<p>“It’s curious,” observed Henrik. “Have you felt the same thing?⁠—how painful it is to search for old associations and not to find them. To read over a book one has been fond of, or hear an opera into which one has formerly been able to put everything imaginable and a bit more⁠—and sit empty-handed, wondering where it has all gone to!”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” Martin agreed, “it’s a strange, oppressive feeling. One feels as if it was one’s duty to stick to the past, as if one were committing an infidelity.⁠ ⁠… And one can do nothing. Why is it really so painful? Is it perhaps because there is no plaintiff in the suit, no clearly formulated claim to meet? For the plaintiff is not the book or the music which one has lost touch with, not the mood which shrinks away; the plaintiff is one’s old self, and that is dead and buried, it is supplanted and refuted by the new, it has no plea to make and yet it does make a sort of plea. Therein lies the paradox, and there is nothing as vexatious as a paradox, when it is not comic.”</p>
			<p>Henrik took up the thread.</p>
			<p>“Yes, you are right; it is between the old and the new self that the battle is, and as long as there is a new which is the stronger, one can always master the phantoms. There is a continuous growth. The old goes, the new comes⁠—or the old goes, that’s really the one certain thing, for how long can one be sure whether the new will come in its place? Suppose the supply should stop some day, suppose nothing under the sun should be new any more, and one only became poorer with every year and every day that passed!”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Martin, “that sort of thing happens sometimes. And there are cases then in which a man digs up the oldest, the deadest, and most withered thing in his past and begins to worship it anew without seeing the caricature. That’s nearly the worst of all. Better the old saying: poor but proud.”</p>
			<p>They sat silent a few minutes. The sun had gone, and still it was not twilight yet. It was almost brighter in the room than just before; everything in it had merely become suddenly pale.</p>
			<p>Henrik broke the silence.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” he said, “it’s a melancholy feeling to grow out of oneself and one’s old associations⁠—but what’s it matter so long as one grows? And what is melancholy, anyhow, if it isn’t what the rowdy said of the toothbrush, a new kind of amusement invented by the upper classes? But the melancholy is only there when it’s a matter of associations and music and ideas. It was really something else I’ve been thinking of all the time. I’ve been thinking of love and women. If one comes into that province, it isn’t only just melancholy any longer; no, one can’t get off so cheaply. A man is fond of a woman. He wants the whole of eternity to be in that feeling. And yet he can’t escape reflecting that this emotion must be subordinate to the same law of growth as everything else in the world, that some day he will weary of what he loves just as one wearies of the moonlight music in ‘Faust.’ I have not had many love affairs, but, believe me, I have never even in my imagination begun the game otherwise than with the thought: may she be the first to tire, and not I!”</p>
			<p>“I’m afraid that prayer will not be often uttered,” said Martin. “To be sure both a lover and a married man may be betrayed, but it rarely happens that they wish to be.”</p>
			<p>“Still I’m ashamed of the prayer, for I know it comes straight from my heart’s great cowardice. How far must we not have come from the primitive simple and straightforward conception of these things to think it is happier to be betrayed than to betray! And yet that’s how I feel. What does love signify to me; what does it ever mean to a man? Why should there be anything tragic in the fact that a man is betrayed in love? If he takes it tragically he merely becomes comic. And if on the discovery that he is a cuckold he breaks off reading a good book, he deserves to be one. But women⁠—it’s a different thing with them.”</p>
			<p>Henrik’s glance was fixed on vacancy.</p>
			<p>“Deserted women,” he said⁠—“there’s something special about them. One can’t escape lightly from the thought of them. No, if they scold and fuss and make a row, it’s easier at once; then the whole thing becomes burlesque, one shakes it off, and is free. Then one asks oneself, ‘How did I ever come to love such a creature?’ One easily persuades oneself that one has never loved her, and so she’s out of the story. But the others⁠—it seems the most painful thing of all to me to imagine her whom I love withered and pale, discarded, put in the shadow side of life, while I myself live on.⁠ ⁠… It is a paradox, I realize⁠—it can never happen; one cannot at the same time act so and feel it so. And yet⁠ ⁠… I met an old woman just now, here on the street, right outside your door. She was old and very pale and a little comic. She was quite shabbily dressed, too⁠—one of the poor who are too proud to beg. One often sees such old women; there was nothing remarkable about her, nothing that distinguished her from any others of her kind, except that all at once, when I came close to her, she struck me as so like⁠—No, I can’t tell you straight out. There’s a young girl I’m very fond of. I’m so fond of her that we’re going to be married, perhaps very soon. It was she that the old woman was like, despite the difference in age and all the rest⁠—it was one of those indefinite resemblances that one thinks one sees the first moment, and the next it’s gone without one’s knowing in what it consists. But that moment was enough for me; a chill went through me, a shudder as if I had seen something terrible, and it seemed to me only all the worse that everything else was as usual: the sun was shining and people were on the street.⁠ ⁠… The girl I care for stood before me, she passed me, withered, discarded, a little comic. It came over me that not even the thought that I myself was dead and lying under the earth could be any consolation to me in such a case; the only conception that could bring any relief was that I was living as wretched and exhausted as she.”</p>
			<p>They sat quiet a long while.</p>
			<p>“Tell me,” Martin finally asked, “who is she, the girl you are fond of? That is, if it’s no secret. Do I know her?”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Henrik, in a subdued voice, “you know her, and I can tell you. It is Sigrid Tesch.”</p>
			<p>Sigrid Tesch. Martin saw before him a young and supple figure, with dark abundant hair and delicate regular features. He had met her a couple of times quite cursorily. He knew she had made an impression on Henrik, and in his own twilight thoughts she had sometimes passed by with a pallid dream smile.</p>
			<p>So it was she then, Sigrid Tesch, who was to be Henrik’s bride.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Henrik, “isn’t it inexplicable that one can dare go into such a thing as love?⁠ ⁠… And yet.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Martin, “and yet.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>They both smiled.</p>
			<p>Henrik Rissler got up.</p>
			<p>“It is dusk,” he said; “we can hardly see the glasses. Will you go out with me? It’s wonderful outside tonight. Oh, you want to write⁠—Well, we’ll see each other again soon. Goodbye!”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
